Also see CSRF report, NOAA/DFO Sidney meeting report, and SOPO 2024 report.

talks
*****
pacea-talk.Rmd is the main one, got a bit fancy with switches for a long and
short talk, so made:
pacea-talk-sopo-25-update.Rmd for SOPO 25.
Using that as a template for:
pacea-talk-short.Rmd for FUTURE Habitat talk plus Molecular Genetics section meeting.

National EAFM seminar for 9th May 2024 (and add links to email): [see email to
Mary and Susan, 18th April 2024, in which I tweaked this and embedded references]

Presenting pacea: an R package of Pacific ecosystem information to help facilitate an
ecosystem approach to fisheries management.

Andrew Edwards

The leading cause of ecosystem information not being used in DFO stock assessments is
the availability of such information. Our pacea R package aims to overcome this
limitation by amalgamating disparate types of information in a single R package.
Released in November 2023, pacea currently includes:
 - 204,828 calculations of daily sea surface temperature based on data from 19
 buoys;
 - 27 years of monthly mean outputs from a spatial physical-biogeochemical
 model, for 40,580 spatial cells, including pH, salinity, temperature,
 phytoplankton, and primary production.
 - 42 years of spatial values from NOAA’s spatial Optimum Interpolation Sea Surface Temperature (OISST) record, that incorporates observations from different platforms (satellites, ships, buoys, and Argo floats);
- 9 climatic and oceanographic indices, such as the Pacific Decadal Oscillation and those related to El Niño;
- estimates of abundances for Harbour Seals and Pacific Hake;
- zooplankton biomass anomalies for 25 species groups, from 1996 onwards.
The package includes many helper and plotting functions with full documentation
and references. This talk will demonstrate the package, and also explain some of
the features that may be of interest to colleagues from other regions who might
consider building a similar package; pacea itself was originally motivated by
the gslea package for the Gulf of St Lawrence.

Add logo. Add references.

--
Potential high-level DMC (PAC RDG level) five-minute talk, think Andy T would
actually give it. Sent to Steve, 1/11/24. DOn't think it ever happened, maybe
was just mentioned somewhere.

pacea: an R package of Pacific ecosystem information to help facilitate an
ecosystem approach to fisheries management.

- DFO is moving towards an Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries Management.
- The leading cause of ecosystem information not being used in DFO stock assessments is
the availability of such information.
- Our pacea package is overcoming this limitation by amalgamating disparate
types of information (e.g. outputs from oceanographic models, temperatures from
buoys, zooplankton biomass anomalies), together with plotting and analytical
functions.
- Package authors are from StAR, OSD, and ESD.

--
For NOAA/DFO Seattle 2025, 10 min talk, write up:

Collaborators: Andrew Edwards (DFO), Kristin Marshall (NOAA), Mary Hunsicker (NOAA), and pacea and hake authors listed below.

Outputs: Edwards A.M., Tai T.C., Watson J., Peña M.A., Hilborn A., Hannah C.G., Rooper C.N., Flynn K.L., and Oldford, G.L. (2024). pacea: An R package of Pacific ecosystem information to help facilitate an ecosystem approach to fisheries management. https://github.com/pbs-assess/pacea

Appendix H of Johnson K.F., Edwards A.M., Berger A.M., Grandin C.J., and Wetzel C.R. (2025). Status of the Pacific Hake (whiting) stock in U.S. and Canadian waters in 2025. Prepared by the Joint Technical Committee of the U.S. and Canada Pacific Hake/Whiting Agreement, National Marine Fisheries Service and Fisheries and Oceans Canada. 286 p.

Outcomes: New model outputs added to the pacea R package in response to last year’s meeting. A hake-specific ecosystem summary included in the US-Canada Pacific Hake stock assessment for the first time.

The leading cause of ecosystem information not being used in DFO stock assessments is the availability of such information. To help alleviate this DFO scientists have built the R package pacea. While the primary audience is DFO stock assessors, the package is open source and freely available to anyone interested, and so was presented at the 2024 meeting. This prompted a request from Lisa Crozier (NOAA) to extend outputs from the British Columbia Continental
Margin Model all the way down to the Washington and Oregon border (the Columbia River), for use in salmon studies, rather than just restricting outputs to the Canadian Exclusive Economic Zone as originally done. This has been achieved. Other additions since last year include outputs from the Hindcast of the Salish Sea physical oceanography model, the North Pacific Bifurcation Index, zooplankton biomass anomalies in the Strait of Georgia, and stock assessment outputs for Pacific Herring and Pacific Hake. Some of these were included in the new hake-specific ecosystem summary appendix in the joint US-Canada Pacific Hake stock assessment. Also included for the first time was a risk table that documents ecosystem and climate factors potentially affecting hake productivity and uncertainty. This table was based on the framework outlined by the  California Current Integrated Ecosystem Assessment team.https://www.pcouncil.org/documents/2024/07/review-material-cciea-team-report-on-fep-initiative-4.pdf/.
